# Welcome to Livebook

## Basic usage

Livebook is a tool for crafting **interactive** and **collaborative** code notebooks.

Each notebook consists of a number of cells, which serve as primary building blocks.
There are **Markdown** cells (such as this one) that allow you to describe your work
and **Code** cells to run your Elixir code!

To insert a new cell move your cursor between cells and click one of the revealed buttons. 👇

```elixir
# This is a Code cell - as the name suggests that's where the code goes.
# To evaluate this cell, you can either press the "Evaluate" button above
# or use `Ctrl + Enter` (or Cmd + Enter on a Mac)!

message = "hey, grab yourself a cup of 🍵"
```

Subsequent cells have access to the bindings you've defined:

```elixir
String.replace(message, "🍵", "☕")
```

Note however that bindings are not global, so each cell *sees* only stuff that goes
above itself. This approach helps to keep the notebook clean and predictable
as you keep working on it!

## Sections

You can leverage so called **sections** to nicely group related cells together.
Click on the "Book" icon (<i class="ri-livebook-sections"></i>) in the sidebar
to reveal a list of all sections. As you can see, this approach helps to easily
jump around the notebook, especially once it grows.

Let's make use of this section to see how output is captured!

```elixir
cats = ~w(😼 😹 😻 😺 😸 😽)

for _ <- 1..3 do
  cats
  |> Enum.take_random(3)
  |> Enum.join(" ")
  |> IO.puts()
end
```

<!-- livebook:{"branch_parent_index":1} -->

## Branching sections

Additionally, you can make a section **branch out** from any
previous regular section. Hover over the section name to reveal
available actions and click on the branch icon to select the
parent section.

You still have access to all the previous data:

```elixir
{message, cats}
```

The important characteristic of a branching section is that
it runs independently from other sections and as such is well
suited for running long computations "in background".

```elixir
Process.sleep(300_000)
```

Having this cell running, feel free to insert another Code cell
in the section below and see it evaluates immediately.

## Saving notebooks

By default, notebooks are stored in a temporary directory, which is fine for
interactive hacking, but oftentimes you will want to save your work for later.
Such can be done by clicking on the "Disk" icon (<i class="ri-livebook-save"></i>)
in the bottom-right corner and selecting the file location.

Notebooks are stored in **live markdown** format, which is the Markdown you know,
with just a few assumptions on how particular elements are represented. Thanks to this
approach you can easily keep notebooks under version control and get readable diffs.
You can also easily preview those files and even edit them in a text editor.

## Stepping up your workflow

Once you start using notebooks more, it's gonna be beneficial
to optimise how you move around. Livebook leverages the concept of
**navigation**/**insert** modes and offers many shortcuts for common operations.
Make sure to check out the shortcuts by clicking the "Keyboard" icon
(<i class="ri-livebook-shortcuts"></i>) in the sidebar or
by pressing <kbd>?</kbd>.

## Markdown extensions

Livebook also include supports for links, mathematical expressions, and Mermaid diagrams.

### Links

It is possible to link between Livebooks using Markdown's link syntax.
For example, `[next chapter](chapter_2.livemd)` could be used to link
to a Livebook named `chapter_2.livemd` in the same directory as the current
notebook. Once clicked, Livebook will automatically open up a new session
to execute the linked notebook.

### Math expressions

Livebook uses $\TeX$ syntax for math inside your Markdown cells.
It supports both inline math, like $e^{\pi i} + 1 = 0$, as well as display math:

$$
S(x) = \frac{1}{1 + e^{-x}} = \frac{e^{x}}{e^{x} + 1}
$$

<!-- livebook:{"force_markdown":true} -->

To write your own, put your math expressions between \$ signs for inline math
or \$\$ if you want display math. You can double click the formulas above to see
how they are written.

You can explore all supported expressions in the [KaTeX documentation](https://katex.org/docs/supported.html).

### Mermaid diagrams

[Mermaid](https://mermaid-js.github.io/) is a library for creating diagrams
and visualizations using text and code. You can define those diagrams in
your Markdown cells via ```` ```mermaid ```` blocks. Let's see an example:

```mermaid
graph TD;
    A-->B;
    A-->C;
    B-->D;
    C-->D;
```

## Next steps

That's our quick intro to Livebook! Where to go next?

* If you are not familiar with Elixir, there is a fast paced
  introduction to the language in the [Distributed portals
  with Elixir](/explore/notebooks/distributed-portals-with-elixir)
  notebook;

* Learn how Elixir integrates with Livebook in the
  [Elixir and Livebook](/explore/notebooks/elixir-and-livebook) notebook;

* Finally, remember Livebook is an open source project, so feel free to
  look into [the repository](https://github.com/livebook-dev/livebook)
  to contribute, report bugs, suggest features or just skim over the
  codebase.

Now go ahead and build something cool! 🚢
