# Welcome to Livebook

## Basic usage

Livebook is a tool for crafting **interactive** and **collaborative** code notebooks.

Each notebook consists of a number of cells, which serve as primary building blocks.
There are **Markdown** cells (such as this one) that allow you to describe your work
and **Code** cells to run your Elixir code!

To insert a new cell move your cursor between cells and click one of the revealed buttons. 👇

```elixir
# This is a Code cell - as the name suggests that's where the code goes.
# To evaluate this cell, you can either press the "Evaluate" button above
# or use `Ctrl + Enter` (or Cmd + Enter on a Mac)!

message = "hey, grab yourself a cup of 🍵"
```

Subsequent cells have access to the bindings you've defined:

```elixir
String.replace(message, "🍵", "☕")
```

Note however that bindings are not global, so each cell *sees* only stuff
that goes above itself. This approach helps to keep the notebook clean and
predictable as you keep working on it. Furthermore, Livebook tracks which
variables are used by each cell and in order to detect which cells become
stale. For example, try changing the `message` variable and you will see
the status indicator on the bottom right of the second cell become yellow.

## Sections

You can leverage so called **sections** to nicely group related cells together.
Click on the "Book" icon (<i class="ri-livebook-sections"></i>) in the sidebar
to reveal a list of all sections. As you can see, this approach helps to easily
jump around the notebook, especially once it grows.

Let's make use of this section to see how output is captured!

```elixir
cats = ~w(😼 😹 😻 😺 😸 😽)

for _ <- 1..3 do
  cats
  |> Enum.take_random(3)
  |> Enum.join(" ")
  |> IO.puts()
end
```

<!-- livebook:{"branch_parent_index":1} -->

## Branching sections

Additionally, you can make a section **branch out** from any
previous regular section. Hover over the section name to reveal
available actions and click on the branch icon to select the
parent section.

You still have access to all the previous data:

```elixir
{message, cats}
```

The important characteristic of a branching section is that
it runs independently from other sections and as such is well
suited for running long computations "in background".

```elixir
Process.sleep(300_000)
```

Having this cell running, feel free to insert another Code cell
in the section below and see it evaluates immediately. Crashes
in branched sections also have limited scope and will affect only
the branched section.

## Saving notebooks

By default, notebooks are stored in a temporary directory, which is fine for
interactive hacking, but oftentimes you will want to save your work for later.
Such can be done by clicking on the "Disk" icon (<i class="ri-livebook-save"></i>)
in the bottom-right corner and selecting the file location.

Once saved, you can access the location of the current `.livemd` file and
its current directory using `__ENV__` and `__DIR__` variables:

```elixir
IO.puts(__ENV__.file)
IO.puts(__DIR__)
```

Notebooks are stored in **live markdown** format, which is the Markdown you know,
with just a few assumptions on how particular elements are represented. Thanks to this
approach you can easily keep notebooks under version control and get readable diffs.
You can also easily preview those files and even edit them in a text editor.

## Keyboard shortcuts

Once you start using notebooks more, it's gonna be beneficial
to optimise how you move around. Livebook leverages the concept of
**navigation**/**insert** modes and offers many shortcuts for common operations.
Make sure to check out the shortcuts by clicking the "Keyboard" icon
(<i class="ri-livebook-shortcuts"></i>) in the sidebar or
by pressing <kbd>?</kbd>.

<!-- livebook:{"branch_parent_index":1} -->

## Autocompletion

Elixir code cells also support autocompletion. Autocompletion
happens automatically as you type but you can explicitly trigger
it with <kbd>ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>␣</kbd>. You must have started
executed a cell at least once for the autocompletion engine to
load.

Let's try autocompleting the code below to `System.version()`.
First put the cursor after the `System` below and type `.`:

```elixir
System
```

You should have seen the editor listing many different options,
which you can use to find `version`. Executing the code will
return the Elixir version.

Note you can also press <kbd>tab</kbd> to cycle across the completion
alternatives.

<!-- livebook:{"branch_parent_index":1} -->

## Storing secrets in Hubs

Livebook is capable of managing all secrets that belong to a notebook.
Secrets can be read by Elixir Code cells and also by Smart cells -
a feature we will explore in future sections.

Secrets are environment variables starting with the `LB_` prefix. For
example, let's try reading an environment variable:

```elixir
System.fetch_env!("LB_MY_SECRETZ")
```

Execute the cell above. If the secret is not available, Livebook will
automatically detect it and prompt you to add the missing secret. You
can save a secret in two different locations:

  * in your notebook session: once you restart the session or your
    Livebook, the secret will be gone and you must input it again

  * in a Hub: a Hub is a location where you can safely store secrets,
    deploy notebooks, and more. Every Livebook application has a personal
    Hub that can store secrets and stamp notebooks

Once the secret is saved, execute the cell again and it will evaluate
successfully.

If you save secrets in your Hub, you will only need to input the secret
once in notebooks authored by you. You can manage all of your secrets
by clicking the lock icon (<i class="ri-lock-password-line"></i>) on the
sidebar.

## Markdown extensions

Livebook also include supports for links, mathematical expressions, and Mermaid diagrams.

### Links

It is possible to link between Livebooks using Markdown's link syntax.
For example, `[next chapter](chapter_2.livemd)` could be used to link
to a Livebook named `chapter_2.livemd` in the same directory as the current
notebook. Once clicked, Livebook will automatically open up a new session
to execute the linked notebook.

<!-- livebook:{"break_markdown":true} -->

### Math expressions

Livebook uses $\TeX$ syntax for math inside your Markdown cells.
It supports both inline math, like $e^{\pi i} + 1 = 0$, as well as display math:

$$
S(x) = \frac{1}{1 + e^{-x}} = \frac{e^{x}}{e^{x} + 1}
$$

<!-- livebook:{"force_markdown":true} -->

To write your own, put your math expressions between \$ signs for inline math
or \$\$ if you want display math. You can double click the formulas above to see
how they are written.

You can explore all supported expressions in the [KaTeX documentation](https://katex.org/docs/supported.html).

<!-- livebook:{"break_markdown":true} -->

### Mermaid diagrams

[Mermaid](https://mermaid-js.github.io/) is a library for creating diagrams
and visualizations using text and code. You can define those diagrams in
your Markdown cells via ```` ```mermaid ```` blocks. Let's see an example:

```mermaid
graph TD;
    A-->B;
    A-->C;
    B-->D;
    C-->D;
```

## Elixir integration

Here are some tips on how to better integrate Livebook with Elixir.

### Mix projects

Sometimes you may want to run a notebook within the context of an existing
Mix project. This is possible from Elixir v1.14 with the help of `Mix.install/2`.

As an example, imagine you have created a notebook inside your current project,
at `notebooks/example.livemd`. In order to run within the root Mix project, using
the same configuration and dependencies versions, you can change your notebook
setup cell to invoke `Mix.install/2` with the following arguments:

<!-- livebook:{"force_markdown":true} -->

```elixir
my_app_root = Path.join(__DIR__, "..")

Mix.install(
  [
    {:my_app, path: my_app_root, env: :dev}
  ],
  config_path: Path.join(my_app_root, "config/config.exs"),
  lockfile: Path.join(my_app_root, "mix.lock")
)
```

<!-- livebook:{"break_markdown":true} -->

### Runtimes

Livebook has a concept of **runtime**, which in practice is an Elixir node responsible
for evaluating your code. You can choose the runtime by clicking the "Runtime" icon
(<i class="ri-livebook-runtime"></i>) on the sidebar (or by using the <kbd>s</kbd> <kbd>r</kbd>
keyboard shortcut).

By default, a new Elixir node is started (similarly to starting `iex`). You can click
reconnect whenever you want to discard the current node and start a new one.

You can also manually *attach* to an existing distributed node by picking the
"Attached Node" runtime. To do so, you will need the Erlang Name of the external node
and its Erlang Cookie. For example, you can start a Phoenix application as follows:

```shell
$ iex --sname phoenix-app --cookie secret -S mix phx.server
```

Now open up a new notebook and click the "Runtime" icon on the sidebar.
Click to "Configure" the runtime and choose "Attached node". Input the
name and cookie as above and you should be ready to connect to it.

Note, however, that you can't install new dependencies on a connected runtime.
If you want to install dependencies, you have two options:

  1. Use the Mix project approach outlined in the previous section;

  2. Use a regular notebook and use
     [`Node.connect/1`](https://hexdocs.pm/elixir/Node.html#connect/1)
     to connect to your application.
     Use [the `:erpc` module](https://www.erlang.org/doc/man/erpc.html)
     to fetch data from the remote node and execute code.

<!-- livebook:{"break_markdown":true} -->

### Evaluation vs compilation

Livebook automatically shows the execution time of each Code
cell on the bottom-right of the cell. After evaluation, the total
time can be seen by hovering the green dot.

However, it is important to remember that all code outside of
a module in Elixir is *evaluated*, and therefore executes much
slower than code defined inside modules, which are *compiled*.

Let's see an example. Run the cell below:

```elixir
Enum.reduce(1..1_000_000, 0, fn x, acc -> x + acc end)
```

We are adding all of the elements in a range by iterating them
one by one. However, executing it likely takes some reasonable
amount of time, as the invocation of the `Enum.reduce/3` as well
as the anonymous function argument are evaluated.

However, what if we move the above to inside a function? Let's do
that:

```elixir
defmodule Bench do
  def sum do
    Enum.reduce(1..1_000_000, 0, fn x, acc -> x + acc end)
  end
end
```

Now let's try running it:

```elixir
Bench.sum()
```

The latest cell should execute a least an order of magnitude faster
than the previous `Enum.reduce/3` call. While the call `Bench.sum()`
itself is evaluated, the one million iterations of `Enum.reduce/3`
happen inside a module, which is compiled.

If a notebook is performing slower than expected, consider moving
the bulk of the execution to inside modules.

<!-- livebook:{"break_markdown":true} -->

### Running tests

It is also possible to run tests directly from your notebooks.
The key is to disable `ExUnit`'s autorun feature and then explicitly
run the test suite after all test cases have been defined:

```elixir
ExUnit.start(autorun: false)

defmodule MyTest do
  use ExUnit.Case, async: true

  test "it works" do
    assert true
  end
end

ExUnit.run()
```

This helps you follow best practices and ensure the code you write
behaves as expected!

## Next steps

That's our quick intro to Livebook! Where to go next?

* If you are not familiar with Elixir, there is a fast paced
  introduction to the language in the [Distributed portals
  with Elixir](/learn/notebooks/distributed-portals-with-elixir)
  notebook;

* Go back [to the Learn page](/learn) and see how to use Livebook to
  deploy apps, explore data, plot graphs, and much more;

* Finally, remember Livebook is an open source project, so feel free to
  look into [the repository](https://github.com/livebook-dev/livebook)
  to contribute, report bugs, suggest features or just skim over the
  codebase.

Now go ahead and build something cool! 🚢
